elemental - fire, earth, water, air, nature
shadow
runecrafting?
illusion - use trinkets, devices, etc. for invisibility, confusion, phase door, and other circus magic things
alchemy - scientific use of materials/chemicals to make potions (bombs, poison, rusting, light, heat)
divine - cultish, as gods have been forgotten; based on piety and following particular rules to get better spells
mysticism - stat boosts, resistances, telepathy
druidic - camoflage, calm animal, healing, food creation, poison, etc.

Definitely like Runescape, different magic categories should offer different abilities the other ones simply don't have.
Many (most? all?) spells should use components, which are stored in the inventory section as materials.

Potions:
-Require a certain skill level and certain ingredients to create, but can be used by anyone.  Falls into alchemy and druidic categories.
-Tend to act on a personal level; must be ingested or applied.
-Non-magical; effects should be reasonable in real world.
-Should come in several levels, increasing the effect, duration, etc.
-Can (eventually) be thrown to apply their effect to what they hit; this probably counts as "using" the item on the primarily worn item (since it's not like you're force-feeding the target)
cure wounds - heals 20% (higher levels heal more)
poison - when used on a weapon, gives it a temporary poison quality (on anything else, "you have no reason to use those items together" - a generic message for any unrecognized pairing)
antitoxin - reduces current poison level
speed - temporarily increases speed
acid - use with items to damage them; heavy damage if drunk (throwing damages worn armor)
water - no effect, but rusts metal items (reduces DR)
stoneskin - increases DR; perhaps this should be something else, since it's not really "non-magical"?
 -maybe there could be a variation of this, either alchemic or druidic, that boosts both max and current hitpoints, then reduces both gradually until they're at their original levels (this could mean a player dies if he took more damage than he could handle while boosted and didn't heal)
 

Illusion:
-Very accessible; low cost for components, but ultimately limited in what it can offer, since it's not truly magical.
-Possibly spells can come from different components, or not require any at all?
-Also, may only work once on an enemy? after all, once you know how a trick works, it's a lot harder to fool you with that same trick
Hiding - "smoke screen"; specifies a cluster of tiles that only the player can see in; would last a certain duration based on spell components and level
Befuddle - targets a monster or group of monsters and stuns/confuses them for a certain number of turns; could also have a ventriloquism effect that causes them to move to a targeted tile for a turn or two
Displace - leaves an illusion on the casted tile that remains after player moves away, but is instantly dispelled by any attack; the monster might automatically move to the tile they're attempting to attack, which could set them up to be out of position, or moving to a dangerous spot (trap), or something of that sort.
-this could be done by having monsters have a "threat" level, and AI would always attack the highest threat.  in this case, that would be the illusion
Elusiveness - percentage chance to completely avoid attacks for a certain amount of turns (maybe "tumbling" or "gymnastics")
Charm - temporarily makes a monster neutral or coaligned, based on level
Displace - relocates caster a few tiles away
Hypnotise - paralyzes/sleeps target
Escape - counters binding/paralysis
Sense - detect invisible (maybe that it's there, rather than what it is)

Druidic:
-Bad name, since it has the connotation of "woodsy," and while this is all abilities based on the natural world, there's no forest, but caves.
-Maybe more of a survival skillset?
Healing salve - converts medicinal fungus into Healing Salve
