Without explicit levelling (for now), there should still be an obvious progression for the player as the game goes on.  At the very least, there should be plenty of low-risk activities for the player for the opening part of the game, and if and how they want to progress, additional challenges should come up that they need to prepare for.

Up until the first special level or so, combat should require no special care on the part of the player, other than maintaining functional armor.  Monsters should be able to hit no more than 1 or 2 above the player's starting armor absorption ability (that is, if a player starts with AR 2, monsters should hit no more than 3 or 4).  Aim for skirmishes (that is, one-on-one combat) resulting in no more than 2 points of damage to the player.  The balance, for now, is that physicians can take 1 more point of damage each skirmish, since they'll regenerate it; blacksmiths would have armor that can absorb 1 more point of damage per hit, and will have a stronger weapon.

Basically, the armor that the physician begins with should be available as monsters are killed (rogues, etc.) - as long as they continue to wear the best armor that drops, they should be able to maintain a decent HP level.  The blacksmith, on the other hand, has superior armor to what is commonly found, but each point of damage that DOES get through is more dangerous in the long term.  Either way, whether through lower but regenerated hitpoints, or higher but non-regenerated hitpoints, the player should stumble upon the first special level in somewhat dire straits.  Whether this is corrected by a free heal/repair, a powerful weapon/armor (such as if the special level is a lair), a batch of healing items (such as in an old supply cache), or just a temporary haven from enemies, the player should now, in some capacity, be ready to take on more dangerous enemies afterward.

If the player has no weapon/armor, the dungeon should be a very dangerous place.  However, if wielding the proper starting equipment, monsters like rats and snakes should be unable to harm the player, though they would damage armor.  (Consider the strength scale in Galactic Warfare - the player should either easily handle a monster, easily be defeated, or have a fairly rough, evenly matched time.)  Rogues and bears would be hitting that 2-4 HP loss per encounter sweet spot (bears would be a bigger risk because they have more hit points and no useful drops), while ogres are a massive risk but have powerful weapon drops.

One way to manage danger is by managing encounters.  Especially with HP regeneration, a one-on-one encounter is MUCH easier on the player, since they can not only get the first hit, but they're only getting hit once for each hit they deliver.  There's also an out if the player chooses to flee.  However, the current cave-like system makes enforcing this difficult.  Hallways are a crucial element in encounter management and giving that breather between encounters.  It's not immediately apparent, but I imagine most dungeon crawls have monsters primarily in rooms, meaning exploration and combat are often exclusive to each other.  Explore, explore, hit a room - boom, kill the 1-4 monsters there, gather loot, explore, explore, repeat.  In my game, there IS no exploration.  You're wading through monsters until you find the stairs.  There's no reason to explore the level once you've done that.

So what are the "rewards" in this game? What's the carrot that keeps drawing the player forward?

--

One major thing to consider is how the player himself improves in capability over the span of the game.  Horizon: Zero Dawn and The Last of Us both seem to maintain roughly the same hitpoints (though HZD does increase it by 10 points each level or so), with character improvement coming from the gear they wear and the modifications they use, as well as some skills that enhance damage in certain situations.

--

"one-way" levels - levels that are extremely difficult to get through, such that it's hard to go halfway, and once you're halfway you might as well go the rest of the way.  Then, there would be no alternate route through there; to go back up, you have to go through the gauntlet again, encouraging the player to remain in the lower levels from that point forward.  (This could be rough for earlier quests, though, that would get "locked off" if the player can't feasibly return.)
-maybe an acid/slime pit level

hunter class that's stealth based, along with the idea of sneaking past monsters and dealing high-damage hits to unsuspecting/helpless monsters